Published 
  25 December 1973

#I believe that Christmas should remind us that the qualities of the human spirit are more important than material gain.
@1973 saw the wedding of Princess Anne to Captain Mark Phillips, and The Queen's Christmas Broadcast that year included film shot at Buckingham Palace on the wedding day.
It is now 21 years since I first broadcast a Christmas Message to the Commonwealth. Then our two elder children were only four and two.
Now, our daughter joins us for Christmas with her husband and we are celebrating the festival this year with the memories of their wedding very much in our minds.
We are constantly being told that we live in a changing world and that we need to adapt to changing conditions. But this is only part of the truth and I am sure that all parents seeing their children getting married are reminded of the continuity of human life.
That is why, I think, that at weddings all friends and relations, and even complete strangers, can stop worrying for a moment and share in the happiness of the couple who are getting married.
I am glad that my daughter's wedding gave such pleasure to so many people just at a time when the world was facing very serious problems.
People all over the world watched the wedding on television, but there were still many in London on the day, and their warmth and enthusiasm ensured it was an occasion my family will never forget.
Earlier this year, I went to Canada for a different sort of 'family occasion'. This was the meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government, and here, I was reminded of the importance of human relationships in world affairs, and how membership of the Commonwealth has a subtle influence on the relationships between its leaders.
I was impressed by the spirit which brought together so many leaders from such different countries, and enabled them to discuss constructively matters which concern us all as friends.
Those of you who are surrounded by friends - or, of course, who are members of a happy family - know this makes life much easier.
Everything - the good and the bad - can be shared, but it is too easy for us to forget those who are not so fortunate.
However, there are many people of all ages who go out to help the old and the lonely, the sick and the handicapped. I am sure that, in so doing, they find the real happiness that comes from serving and thinking of others.
I believe that Christmas should remind us that the qualities of the human spirit are more important than material gain. Christ taught love and charity and that we should show humanity and compassion at all times and in all situations.
A lack of humanity and compassion can be very destructive - how easily this causes diversions within nations and between nations. We should remember instead how much we have in common and resolve to give expression to the best of our human qualities, not only at Christmas, but right through the year.
In this Christmas spirit let us greet all our fellow men and join together in this festival of tolerance and companionship.
I wish you all a very happy Christmas.
Share this article:
Stirring examples of courage, commitment and selfless dedication to duty have been demonstrated in every Commonwealth nation and territory.
Such a blend of traditions serves to make us stronger, individually and collectively, by providing the ingredients needed for social, political and economic resilience
On behalf of the people The Trust has helped thank you to each and every one of you for all your incredible support, and to Your Majesty thank you for choosing to give the...
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to the Commonwealth Science Conference in Singapore following the success of the Bangalore Conference in 2014. I am very grateful...
Since you became an independent country in 1966, you have continued to flourish and grow into a strong and confident nation.
On behalf of my grandmother, The Queen, I am grateful to the Government and the people of St. Lucia for this most generous contribution.
Being inclusive and accepting diversity goes far deeper than accepting differences at face value and being tolerant.
The baton relay represents a calling together of people from every part of the Commonwealth.
In the Commonwealth, governments, businesses, communities and individuals should each strive to match words and good intentions with deeds. Every contribution has its part to...
I have been warned I may have Happy Birthday sung to me more than once or twice.
Despite its size and scale, the Commonwealth to me is still at heart a collection of villages.
The Commonwealth is one of the great partnerships of the world where rich and poor, large and small, work together for the common good.
Thank you, Mr Prime Minister of Canada, for making me feel so old!
Ladies and gentlemen, I feel enormously proud of what the Commonwealth has achieved, and all of it within my lifetime
St. Paul reminds us that all Christians, as ambassadors for Christ, are entrusted with the ministry of reconciliation.
It is through this lens of history that we should view the conflicts of today, and so give us hope for tomorrow.
At Christmas I am always struck by how the spirit of togetherness lies also at the heart of the Christmas story.
Being united - that is, feeling a unity of purpose - is the glue that bonds together the members of a family, a country, a Commonwealth.
All great religions have such times of renewal, moments to take stock before moving on to face the challenges which lie ahead.
My hope this Christmas is that the Christian spirit of reconciliation may burn as strongly in our hearts during the coming year.
In the United Kingdom we have our own particular sorrows in Northern Ireland and I want to send a special message of sympathy to all those men, women and children who have...
My message today is one of encouragement and hope.
Then Christmas comes, and once again we are reminded that people matter, and it is our relationship with one another that is most important.
The Royal Household © Crown Copyright