This past year has been one of great celebration for many. The enthusiasm which greeted the Diamond Jubilee was, of course, especially memorable for me and my family. It was humbling that so many chose to mark the anniversary of a duty which passed to me sixty years ago. People of all ages took the trouble to take part in various ways and in many nations. But perhaps most striking of all was to witness the strength of fellowship and friendship among those who had gathered together on these occasions.Prince Philip and I were joined by our family on the River Thames as we paid tribute to those who have shaped the United Kingdom's past and future as a maritime nation, and welcomed a wonderful array of craft, large and small, from across the Commonwealth. On the barges and the bridges and the banks of the river there were people who had taken their places to cheer through the mist, undaunted by the rain. That day there was a tremendous sense of common determination to celebrate, triumphing over the elements.That same spirit was also in evidence from the moment the Olympic flame arrived on these shores. The flame itself drew hundreds and thousands of people on its journey around the British Isles, and was carried by every kind of deserving individual, many nominated for their own extraordinary service.As London hosted a splendid summer of sport, all those who saw the achievement and courage at the Olympic and Paralympic Games were further inspired by the skill, dedication, training and teamwork of our athletes. In pursuing their own sporting goals, they gave the rest of us the opportunity to share something of the excitement and drama.We were reminded, too, that the success of these great festivals depended to an enormous degree upon the dedication and effort of an army of volunteers. Those public-spirited people came forward in the great tradition of all those who devote themselves to keeping others safe, supported and comforted.For many, Christmas is also a time for coming together. But for others, service will come first. Those serving in our Armed Forces, in our Emergency Services and in our hospitals, whose sense of duty takes them away from family and friends, will be missing those they love. And those who have lost loved ones may find this day especially full of memories. That's why it's important at this time of year to reach out beyond our familiar relationships to think of those who are on their own.At Christmas I am always struck by how the spirit of togetherness lies also at the heart of the Christmas story. A young mother and a dutiful father with their baby were joined by poor shepherds and visitors from afar. They came with their gifts to worship the Christ child. From that day on he has inspired people to commit themselves to the best interests of others.This is the time of year when we remember that God sent his only son 'to serve, not to be served'. He restored love and service to the centre of our lives in the person of Jesus Christ. It is my prayer this Christmas Day that his example and teaching will continue to bring people together to give the best of themselves in the service of others.The carol, 'In the Bleak Midwinter', ends by asking a question of all of us who know the Christmas story, of how God gave himself to us in humble service: 'What can I give him, poor as I am? If I were a shepherd, I would bring a lamb; if I were a wise man, I would do my part'. The carol gives the answer, 'Yet what I can I give him – give my heart'.I wish you all a very happy Christmas.I have been warned I may have Happy Birthday sung to me more than once or twice.St. Paul reminds us that all Christians, as ambassadors for Christ, are entrusted with the ministry of reconciliation.It is through this lens of history that we should view the conflicts of today, and so give us hope for tomorrow.Being united - that is, feeling a unity of purpose - is the glue that bonds together the members of a family, a country, a Commonwealth.All great religions have such times of renewal, moments to take stock before moving on to face the challenges which lie ahead.My hope this Christmas is that the Christian spirit of reconciliation may burn as strongly in our hearts during the coming year.In the United Kingdom we have our own particular sorrows in Northern Ireland and I want to send a special message of sympathy to all those men, women and children who have...My message today is one of encouragement and hope.Then Christmas comes, and once again we are reminded that people matter, and it is our relationship with one another that is most important.For every poppy a life; and a reminder of the grief of loved ones left behind.We are forever grateful to all those who put themselves at risk to keep us safe.The Church has a duty to protect the free practice of all faiths in this countryRight around the world, people gather to compete under standard rules and, in most cases, in a spirit of friendly rivalry.At the heart of our faith stand not a preoccupation with our own welfare and comfort but the concepts of service and of sacrifice.Your Holiness, your presence here today reminds us of our common Christian heritage, and of the Christian contribution to the encouragement of world peace.It is my duty to seek to remain true to the interests of Australia and all Australians as we enter the twenty-first century.I am confident that this diverse Commonwealth of nations can strengthen the common bond that transcends politics, religion, race and economic circumstances.When life seems hard, the courageous do not lie down and accept defeat; instead, they are all the more determined to struggle for a better future.My grandfather, father, husband and two sons have all undergone training here, and I have had many visits over the years.The Christmas story also draws attention to all those people who are on the edge of societyThe birth of a baby brings great happiness - but then the business of growing up begins.As Groucho Marx once said "Anyone can get old - all you have to do is to live long enough". And there are in my view many other anniversaries this year which are more...These natural and human tragedies provided the headline news; they also provoked a quite remarkable humanitarian response.When limitless amounts of information, much of it ephemeral, are instantly accessible on demand, there is a renewed hunger for that which endures and gives meaning.I remember the bonfires along the coastline as we arrived and the enthusiastic welcome we received as guests of your grandfather, King Haakon.Everyone is our neighbour, no matter what race, creed or colour.Separation at this time is especially hard to bear.Je chéris ma place dans la vie du Canada et mon lien avec tous les Canadiens et Canadiennes.